welcome back to natural language
processing now we are going to continue
now with the unit on discourse analysis
so discourse analysis is very different
from most of what you've seen in natural
language processing so far because it
deals with information that goes across
sentences very often the documents that
we are going to process and analyze have
multiple sentences any news article or
story and fiction work has many
sentences so we have any issues with
discourse that we need to focus on
computationally some of them are listed
here the first one is called anaphora so
enough with the Greek word and it is
used to refer to expressions that
correlate with some earlier occurrence
in the document so for example if I say
I went to see my grandfather at the
hospital
period the old man has been there for
weeks
the phrase the old man refers to my
grandfather and it's used in the
sentences anaphoric and then the last
sentence he had surgery a few days ago
again we have an instance of anaphora
the pronoun he is used to refer back to
my grandfather so one of the goals in
computational discourse analysis is to
be able to group those three expressions
my grandfather the old man and he into
one set so that we know that they refer
to the same person so there are two
concepts that I won't introduce at this
time that a very furring expression of
an antecedent so the referring
expression in the examples above was
something like the old man or he and the
antecedent was my grandfather so not for
is a poly not only with not sentential
text but also within single sentences it
is completely possible and frequent that
an enough work expression or a referring
expression may refer to an antecedent
back in the same sentence so what do we
need to do to address this issue
computationally well the first thing
that we need is a model of discourse
that tells us how do people actually go
about generating texts that includes an
offeror so the moment we understand how
they do it it will have an easier time
competing their intent so let's look at
some other phenomena related to
discourse one of them is co-reference so
for example if I say
Jones oh man in the park period as every
morning she was walking the dog so what
does she refer to we have to be able to
figure out of all the words in those two
sentences what it can possibly get for
it first of all we know that it has to
refer to a named entity so it has to
refer to a noun phrase so the noun
phrases are jammed marry park every
morning and her dog so how do we know
which one of those is the correct
antecedent for she well let's think
about it every morning is clearly not a
person whereas she has to be a person so
we have a discrepancy here another
discrepancies again similar nature is
the park the park is not something that
we can refer to as she because it's
inanimate John is a man so we cannot
refer to him as a she either we have a
gender agreement her dog is a possible
reference but the structure of the
sentence makes it impossible for that to
be the right antecedent for she so the
only thing that is left is Mary and you
can check it in fact it makes sense it
has the right gender the right animus
it's an animate person and it appears
previously in the discourse so some of
those features will be used in the
computational analysis of core efference
so there is an annual competition that
is there was an annual competition
called mark that had a specific task
encore efference extraction and for that
evaluation the participants were
provided by nist with a large collection
of documents that were annotated for
core efference manually so here's some
examples it's very difficult to read
those so you should probably pause and
read this carefully the idea here is
that we have some sentence like the
Russian airline Aeroflot has been hit
with a writ for losses and damages found
in Hong Kong and so on so every entity
here is marked with some number for
example the Russian airline Aeroflot is
ID 6 whereas hong kong is ID 15 and so
on so the goal here is to figure out
which of those entities refer to one
another so let's look at some examples
of those so in the second pack
from the slide you can see that some of
the named entities have references that
point back to some other entities so all
seventy-five people on board D Aeroflot
Airbus we have Aeroflot name marked as a
named entity and Airbus also marked as
an entity and you can see that our float
has an idea of ten but it refers back to
the entity numbered six and then later
on when we have the pronoun it it has a
new ID 11 but it is also identified to
cor refer to the named entity 12 so
using this kind of data we can build
automatic systems that use
classification to take into account
every single occurrence of a pawn down
or other anaphoric expression and look
for possible antecedents and use
features to determine what is the
correct one let's look at some other
properties of discourse I looked up the
definition of a screwdriver and the tool
on Wikipedia is roughly what it looks
like it's a fairly long paragraph so you
don't need to read the whole thing a
screwdriver is a tool manual or powered
for turning screws and so on and so
forth what you need to pay attention to
however is the presence of some
discourse structure so for example the
word the shaft and the tip and the word
handles and so on are introduced at the
beginning of sentences and they refer
back to objects that I introduced
directly or indirectly in the previous
sentences the same thing applies to the
word these in the final sentence so how
do we do coherence resolution as I
mentioned before we need to look at
agreement constraints and also position
or constraint so some of the agreement
constraints that make sense our gender
for example male or female number
singular plural anima see you know
animate and inanimate we can also look
at syntactic constraints for example
parallelism we can have two sentences
that have roughly the same structure and
we can use that information to determine
which anaphoric expression refers to
what and the order of the sentences is
also very important enough where
specifically is a phenomenon that refers
back to earlier occurrences in the
document
there is a similar term called katha
fora which refers to are referring
expressions that point to antecedents
that appear after them so example this
would be with its new role in the movie
comma Brad Pitt is going to become even
more famous so in this expression his
appears before its antecedent Brad Pitt
so this is an example of Katara so in
sentence or during the recency is very
important the most likely antecedent
they were referring expression is within
the current sentence earlier on or in
the previous sentence entirely in some
earlier sentence within the same
paragraph very rarely would you see
instances of enough word that if we're
back to entities introduced in the
previous paragraph unless there was some
intervening and a fork expression that
refers back to them in the current
paragraph so I'm going to go now to an
example are based on a paper by lap in
and lease from the early 90s where for
the very first time they looked at the
computational treatment of core FS so
the emanuelly cim came up with a list of
rules that tell you given a list of
candidates for anaphoric resolution what
properties of those make them more
likely to be the correct antecedents so
here are the seven properties that a lap
in the lease were looking at I want to
expand them on the next slide in more
detail first I want to say that sentence
recency is the most important feature if
an entity was introduced in the same
sentence as done a fork expression it's
more likely to be the correct antecedent
than one that was introduced earlier the
other features that come through the
largest number of points are subject
emphases that is when that it is the
subject of the sentence and so on I'm
going to explain them on the next slide
in more detail so how do we deal with
recency if an entity is a candidate to
be the antecedent of a current referring
expression every time we cause a
sentence boundary its weight is going to
be cut in half
so this effectively gets rid of
expressions after a few sentences and in
fact la
nice also have a rule that says it after
four sentences all the candidates get
removed and here's some of the examples
for the different features that they use
so for example for subject an Acura
Integra is parked in the lot so Acura
Integra is a car and it is the subject
of the sentence there is an Acura
Integra parked in the lot this is an
example of the second feature that's an
existential predicate the third example
is Jon parked an Acura in the lot in
this case Acura is the object of the
sentence John gave Susan an Acura this
is an indirect object and finally in his
acura integra george shultz using his
new CD player so this is an example of
an adverbial prepositional phrase that
includes their candidate referent and as
you can see in the order in which I show
them we can have an even decreasing
likelihood that that particular word the
car is that decedent of a pawn now that
appears later on let's turn now to an
example that was described also in the
Jurassic and Martin book this is a
example of the procedure described by
lapin and Lise it's name is resolution
of an a4 procedure it's called also of
app and in recent years there has been
an open-source implementation of this
algorithm by a minion count group at the
national university of singapore so
let's go through the algorithm in more
detail now we're going to take an
existing referring expression and we
want to disambiguate it so for this
purpose we're going to collect all the
possible reference up to four sentences
back we're going to remove all the
potential reference that not agree in
number or gender with the pronoun so in
one of my earlier examples we had John
and then XI so John would be removed in
this example then we move all the
potential constraints that do not pass
interest intentional syntactic or
reference constraints what that means is
that if the sentence doesn't make some
tactics ends with that particular
reference we're going to ignore that and
then we're going to compute the total
salience value of the reference by
adding any applicable values for things
like row parallelism which gives us an
extra 35 points and also cutoff aura
which actually removes a hundred
seventy-five points and then I once we
have added all the feature scores we're
going to select the referent with the
highest salience value and if there is a
tie the tiebreaker is going to be the
closeness to the currently disambiguated
expression and then just so that we can
also take into account recency when we
move to new sentence we're going to have
all the scores of the existing entities
on the list okay so now let's look at an
example from draftkings marking with
three sentences that it shows how the
lapin and Lee's algorithm works for
Pournami resolution the first sentence
talks about the following John so a
beautiful acura integra the dealership
last week he showed it to bill he bought
it so we have four point now that we
need to resolve the first one of them is
he in the second sentence so this point
we have two candidate reference john
acura integra and dealership so let's
see what kind of scores each get they
all get 100 points because they are in
the most recent sentence in addition to
that john gets 80 points for being the
subject Integra gets 50 points for being
the object they get none of them get any
points for being in an existential phase
of being an indirect object because
those are not present in that sentence
the three expressions also get bonus
points for not being in an adverbial
phrase and they also get bonus points
for being the head nouns so the total
number of points for John is 310 the
total number of points were Integra is
280 and the total number of points for
dealership is 230 so this point the
algorithm is going to tell us that John
is the most likely antecedent for the
word he because it has the largest
number of points so at this point we
move to the second sentence now we have
to disambiguate the pronoun it since we
have crossed the sentence boundary we
have to have the values for each of the
antecedent so John is still available as
a candidate however it score gets
dropped from 310 255 points the score
for Integra gets dropped in half and
dealership as well so since we have
added he to the group that involves John
we now have a phrase cluster John and he
he one means the first occurrence of he
and since he knives in the current
sentence that cluster is going to get
the sum of the points for John and for
he so three hundred and ten past hundred
fifty-five that's four hundred and
sixty-five so this point John is still
the most salient entity in the discourse
now we are going to move to the next
example
and we're going to disambiguate it it's
going to get a high score because it
matches the right features and in that
case it is going to refer to integra its
new score is going to be added to the
old score for acura integra therefore
raising it up to four hundred and twenty
so at this point john is still in the
lead and Integra is now close behind but
still if you have to choose at this time
boots to go with John as the default
instead of the Integra and then after we
have process the rest of the pronouns
we're going to get this sort of
structure where Bill gets also an
additional number of points whereas
dealership doesn't have any reference at
all so it's going to keep its lower
score 115 points then after we move
together the second sentence we have to
have each of those scores again and that
was going to keep their relative order
but the absolute values are going to be
smaller and we can continue until we
reach the end of the discourse okay the
next topic that we want to discuss is
going to be about coherence and that
will be in our next slide